README.md, before:


SoDa-RoBERTa
============

SODA-RoBERTa is a **So**urce **Da**ta resource for training __RoBERTa__ transformers for natural language processing tasks in cell and molecular biology.

SourceData database: https://sourcedata.io, "SourceData: a semantic platform for curating and searching figures"
Liechti R, George N, Götz L, El-Gebali S, Chasapi A, Crespo I, Xenarios I, Lemberger T, Nature Methods, https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4471

RoBERTa transformer is a BERT derivative: https://huggingface.co/transformers/model_doc/roberta.html, "RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach" by Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, Veselin Stoyanov

SODA-RoBERTa uses the huggingface (https://huggingface.co) and PyTorch (https://pytorch.org/) frameworks.

The models trained below are used in the SmartTag engine that tags biological entities and their experimental roles in figure legends. 

Tagging biological entites that are the object of investigation in specific experiments reported in scientific figure and classifying their role as measured vs controlled variables allows to easily derive a knowledge graph representing scientific hypotheses reported in the literature. 

SmartTag uses a 3-step pipeline: 

1. Segmentation of the text of figure legends into sub-panel legends.
2. Named Entity Recognition of bioentities and experimental methods.
3. Semantic tagging of the experimental role of generoducts as measured variable or controlled variable.

Accordingly, a specialized language model for scientific biological language is fine tuned into 3 models for the respective tasks: PANELIZATION, NER, ROLES. 

We provide below the instructions to train the language model by fine tuning a pretrained Roberta transormer on text from PubMedCentral and by training the 3 specific models using the SourceData datset.

The training data is in the form of XML files. SODA-ROBERTA provides therefore tools to convert XML into tagged datasets that can be used for token classification tasks. At inference stage, the tagged text is serialized back into json or xml.

# Quick access to the pretrained SoDa-RoBERTa models and the SmartTag pipeline.

Under construction.

# General Setup

Install `docker` (https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) and `docker-compose` (https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/).

Install `git-lfs` (https://git-lfs.github.com/).

Build and start the Docker container with docker-compose:

```
docker-compose build
docker-compose run --rm nlp
```

This will start the following services:

- `nlp` service to run the training commands (with bash as entrypoint)
- a `tensorboard` service on port 6007 (visita at http://localhost:6007) to visualize trainig
- celery/rabbitmq/flower to paralellize data preparation; progress can be followed at on https://localhost:5555 with flower running on port 5555.

The entrypoint in nlp is bash.

Within the container, the assumed default layout is as follows:
```
/app
/data
    ├── /xml         # XML files used as source of examples or for token classification
    │── /text        # text files used for languag modeling
    └── /json        # pre-tokenized and labeled datasets
/lm_models           # language models
/tockl_models        # token classification models
/cache               # the cache used by the data loader
```

# Fine tune specialized language model based on PubMed Central

## Setup

Download Open Access content from PubMed Central (takes a while!):

```
mkdir /data/xml/oapmc
cd /data/xml/oapmc
```

Connect to the EMBL-EBI ftp server:

```
ftp --no-prompt ftp.ebi.ac.uk 
# Name: anonymous
```

Navigate to to the PubMed Central Open Access subset directory and initiate the download:

```
cd /pub/databases/pmc/oa
mget *.xml.gz
exit
```

Expand the files:

```
gunzip *.gz
```

Extract articles from the JATS XML files but keep the XML so that sub-sections (eg figures or abstracts) can be extracted later.

```
python -m common.extract /data/xml/oapmc /data/xml/oapmc_articles -P .//article --keep-xml
```

Randomly split aticles into train, eval, test sets. 

Note: it is better to do this now rather than later, so that these subsets remain as independent as possible. It is important to do so when several examples (i.e. figure legends) are extracted per xml document, otherwise accuracy metrics may be over optimistic (i.e. examples extracted from the same article should NOT be distributed across train, eval and test).

```
python -m common.split /data/xml/oapmc_articles
```

Extract text from the abstracts

```
python -m common.extract /data/oapmc_articles  -P .//abstract
# creates by default /data/text/oapmc_abstracts/ with train valid and test sub dir
```

Note: it is possibel to combined several XPath with the `|` operator to extract several kinds of elements. For example, extract both abstracts and figure legends (this would be very large):

```
python -m common.extract /data/xml/oapmc_articles/ /data/text/oapmc_abstracts_figs/ --proba=0.5 --xpath ".//abstract | .//fig"
```
Note: the option --proba allows to determine the probability with wich each example is actually includedd; this is useful when the dataset is huge and only a random subset needs to be selected.

## Tokenize and prepare dataset

By default, the configuration file `common.config` specifies the pretrained 'roberta-base' model as statring point for fine tuning the language model. The appropriate tokenizer will also be used. To train a language model from scratch, set from_pretrained = '' in common.config and train the tokenizer:

````
python -m lm.tokentrain /data/text/oapmc_abstracts  # ONLY WHEN TRAINING CUSTOMIZED MODEL!
````

Tokenized the data:

````
python -m lm.dataprep /data/text/oapmc_abstracts /data/json/oapmc_abstracts
````

This can take a while for large datasets. To follow the progress, visit http://localhost:5555 (via the celery flower service)

## Train language model

```
python -m lm.train /data/json/oapmc_abstracts
```

Note:   default, the model is saved in /lm_models so that it can be used for subsequent fine tuning for token classification

## Try it:

```
python -m lm.try_it "A kinase phosphorylates its <mask> to activate it."
```

# Fine tuning of pre-trained language model

Now that we have a language model, we fine tune for token classification and text segmentation based on the SourceData dataset.

## Setup

Download the SourceData raw dataset (xml files):

```
wget <url>
unzip download.zip
mv download /data/xml/sourcedata
```

Split the original documents into train, eval and test sets. This is done at the document level since each document may contain several examples. Doing the split already now ensures more independent eval and test sets.

```
python -m common.split /data/xml/sourcedata/ -X xml
```

Extract the examples for NER using an XPAth that identifies individual panel legends within figure legends:

```
mkdir /data/xml/sd_panels
python -m common.extract /data/xml/sourcedata /data/xml/sd_panels -P .//sd-panel --keep_xml
```

Same thing but using a XPath for entire figure legends encompassing several panel legends. This will be used to learn segmentation of figure legends into panel legends:

```
mkdir /data/xml/sd_figs
python -m common.extract /data/xml/sourcedata /data/xml/sd_figs -P .//fig --keep_xml
```

Prepare the datasets for NER and ROLE labels:

```
mkdir /data/json/sd_panels
python -m tokcl.dataprep /data/xml/sd_panels /data/json/sd_panels
mkdir /data/json/sd_figs
python -m tokcl.dataprep /data/xml/sd_figs /data/json/sd_figs
```

Optional: commit the datasets to the repo as lfs objects

```
git lfs track .*jsonl  # do not forget to run this!
git add .gitattributes
git add data/json/sd_figs
git add data/json/sd_panels
git commit -m "sd datasets as lfs object"
git push
```


## Train the models

Train the NER task to learn entity types:

```
python -m tokcl.train /data/json/sd_panels NER
```

Train the ROLES task to learn entity roles:

```
python -m tokcl.train data/xml/sourcedata ROLES
```

Train the PANELIZATION task to learn panel segmentation:

```
python -m tokcl.train data/json/sd_figs PANELIZATION
```

## Use the pipeline

Tada! The trained models are now in /tokcl_models and you can try SmartTag-ging:

```
python -m predict.smtag "We studied mice with genetic ablation of the ERK1 gene in brain and muscle."
```

Commit message:

only relevant features in tokcl data

README.md, after:


SoDa-RoBERTa
============

SODA-RoBERTa is a **So**urce **Da**ta resource for training __RoBERTa__ transformers for natural language processing tasks in cell and molecular biology.

SourceData database: https://sourcedata.io, "SourceData: a semantic platform for curating and searching figures"
Liechti R, George N, Götz L, El-Gebali S, Chasapi A, Crespo I, Xenarios I, Lemberger T, Nature Methods, https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4471

RoBERTa transformer is a BERT derivative: https://huggingface.co/transformers/model_doc/roberta.html, "RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach" by Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, Veselin Stoyanov

SODA-RoBERTa uses the huggingface (https://huggingface.co) and PyTorch (https://pytorch.org/) frameworks.

The models trained below are used in the SmartTag engine that tags biological entities and their experimental roles in figure legends. 

Tagging biological entites that are the object of investigation in specific experiments reported in scientific figure and classifying their role as measured vs controlled variables allows to easily derive a knowledge graph representing scientific hypotheses reported in the literature. 

SmartTag uses a 3-step pipeline: 

1. Segmentation of the text of figure legends into sub-panel legends.
2. Named Entity Recognition of bioentities and experimental methods.
3. Semantic tagging of the experimental role of generoducts as measured variable or controlled variable.

Accordingly, a specialized language model for scientific biological language is fine tuned into 3 models for the respective tasks: PANELIZATION, NER, ROLES. 

We provide below the instructions to train the language model by fine tuning a pretrained Roberta transormer on text from PubMedCentral and by training the 3 specific models using the SourceData datset.

The training data is in the form of XML files. SODA-ROBERTA provides therefore tools to convert XML into tagged datasets that can be used for token classification tasks. At inference stage, the tagged text is serialized back into json or xml.

# Quick access to the pretrained SoDa-RoBERTa models and the SmartTag pipeline.

Under construction.

# General Setup

Setup virtual environment:

```
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install --upgrade pip
```

Install `docker` (https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/). 
Install`docker-compose==1.28.5` (https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/).

```
pip install docker-compose==1.28.5
```

Install `git-lfs` (https://git-lfs.github.com/).

Build and start the Docker container with docker-compose:

```
docker-compose build
docker-compose run --rm nlp
```

This will start the following services:

- `nlp` service to run the training commands (with bash as entrypoint)
- a `tensorboard` service on port 6007 (visita at http://localhost:6007) to visualize trainig
- celery/rabbitmq/flower to paralellize data preparation; progress can be followed at on https://localhost:5555 with flower running on port 5555.

The entrypoint in nlp is bash.

Within the container, the assumed default layout is as follows:
```
/app
/data
    ├── /xml         # XML files used as source of examples or for token classification
    │── /text        # text files used for languag modeling
    └── /json        # pre-tokenized and labeled datasets
/lm_models           # language models
/tockl_models        # token classification models
/cache               # the cache used by the data loader
```

# Fine tune specialized language model based on PubMed Central

## Setup

Download Open Access content from PubMed Central (takes a while!):

```
mkdir /data/xml/oapmc
cd /data/xml/oapmc
```

Connect to the EMBL-EBI ftp server:

```
ftp --no-prompt ftp.ebi.ac.uk 
# Name: anonymous
```

Navigate to to the PubMed Central Open Access subset directory and initiate the download:

```
cd /pub/databases/pmc/oa
mget *.xml.gz
exit
```

Expand the files:

```
gunzip *.gz
```

Extract articles from the JATS XML files but keep the XML so that sub-sections (eg figures or abstracts) can be extracted later.

```
python -m common.extract /data/xml/oapmc /data/xml/oapmc_articles -P .//article --keep-xml
```

Randomly split aticles into train, eval, test sets. 

Note: it is better to do this now rather than later, so that these subsets remain as independent as possible. It is important to do so when several examples (i.e. figure legends) are extracted per xml document, otherwise accuracy metrics may be over optimistic (i.e. examples extracted from the same article should NOT be distributed across train, eval and test).

```
python -m common.split /data/xml/oapmc_articles
```

Extract text from the abstracts

```
python -m common.extract /data/oapmc_articles  -P .//abstract
# creates by default /data/text/oapmc_abstracts/ with train valid and test sub dir
```

Note: it is possibel to combined several XPath with the `|` operator to extract several kinds of elements. For example, extract both abstracts and figure legends (this would be very large):

```
python -m common.extract /data/xml/oapmc_articles/ /data/text/oapmc_abstracts_figs/ --proba=0.5 --xpath ".//abstract | .//fig"
```
Note: the option --proba allows to determine the probability with wich each example is actually includedd; this is useful when the dataset is huge and only a random subset needs to be selected.

## Tokenize and prepare dataset

By default, the configuration file `common.config` specifies the pretrained 'roberta-base' model as statring point for fine tuning the language model. The appropriate tokenizer will also be used. To train a language model from scratch, set from_pretrained = '' in common.config and train the tokenizer:

````
python -m lm.tokentrain /data/text/oapmc_abstracts  # ONLY WHEN TRAINING CUSTOMIZED MODEL!
````

Tokenized the data:

````
python -m lm.dataprep /data/text/oapmc_abstracts /data/json/oapmc_abstracts
````

This can take a while for large datasets. To follow the progress, visit http://localhost:5555 (via the celery flower service)

## Train language model

```
python -m lm.train /data/json/oapmc_abstracts
```

Note:   default, the model is saved in /lm_models so that it can be used for subsequent fine tuning for token classification

## Try it:

```
python -m lm.try_it "A kinase phosphorylates its <mask> to activate it."
```

# Fine tuning of pre-trained language model

Now that we have a language model, we fine tune for token classification and text segmentation based on the SourceData dataset.

## Setup

Download the SourceData raw dataset (xml files):

```
wget <url>
unzip download.zip
mv download /data/xml/sourcedata
```

Split the original documents into train, eval and test sets. This is done at the document level since each document may contain several examples. Doing the split already now ensures more independent eval and test sets.

```
python -m common.split /data/xml/sourcedata/ -X xml
```

Extract the examples for NER using an XPAth that identifies individual panel legends within figure legends:

```
mkdir /data/xml/sd_panels
python -m common.extract /data/xml/sourcedata /data/xml/sd_panels -P .//sd-panel --keep_xml
```

Same thing but using a XPath for entire figure legends encompassing several panel legends. This will be used to learn segmentation of figure legends into panel legends:

```
mkdir /data/xml/sd_figs
python -m common.extract /data/xml/sourcedata /data/xml/sd_figs -P .//fig --keep_xml
```

Prepare the datasets for NER and ROLE labels:

```
mkdir /data/json/sd_panels
python -m tokcl.dataprep /data/xml/sd_panels /data/json/sd_panels
mkdir /data/json/sd_figs
python -m tokcl.dataprep /data/xml/sd_figs /data/json/sd_figs
```

Commit the datasets to the repo as lfs objects

```
git lfs track *.jsonl  # do not forget to run this!
git add .gitattributes
git add data/json/sd_figs
git add data/json/sd_panels
git commit -m "sd datasets as lfs object"
git push
```


## Train the models

Train the NER task to learn entity types:

```
python -m tokcl.train NER
```

Train the ROLES task to learn entity roles:

```
python -m tokcl.train data/xml/sourcedata ROLES
```

Train the PANELIZATION task to learn panel segmentation:

```
python -m tokcl.train data/json/sd_figs PANELIZATION
```

## Use the pipeline

Tada! The trained models are now in /tokcl_models and you can try SmartTag-ging:

```
python -m predict.smtag "We studied mice with genetic ablation of the ERK1 gene in brain and muscle."
```
